enh(blog): Add blog post on generative AI peer review policy (#734)
pyOpenSci/pyopensci.github.io: _posts/2025-11-18-generative-ai-peer-review.md

author: "pyopensci"
permalink: /blog/generative-ai-peer-review-policy.html
header:
  overlay_image: images/headers/pyopensci-floral.png
categories:
  - blog-post
  - community
classes: wide
toc: true
comments: true
last_modified: 2025-09-16
---

authors: Leah Wasser, Jed Brown, Carter Rhea, Ellie Abrahams

## Generative AI meets scientific open source

Some developers believe that using AI products increases efficiency. However, in scientific open source, speed isn't everything—transparency, quality, and community trust are just as important as understanding the environmental impacts of using large language models in our everyday work. Similarly, the ethical questions that these tools raise are also a concern as some communities may benefit from the same tools that hurt others.

## Why we need guidelines

At pyOpenSci, we’ve drafted a new policy for our peer review process to set clear expectations for disclosing the use of LLMs in scientific open-source software.

> This is not about banning AI tools. We recognize their value to some people. Instead, our goal is transparency. We want maintainers to **disclose when and how they’ve used LLMs** so editors and reviewers can fairly and efficiently evaluate submissions. Further, we want to avoid burdening our volunteer editorial and reviewer team with being the first to review generated code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our goal is transparency and fostering reproducible research. For scientific rigor, we want maintainers to **disclose when and how they’ve used LLMs** so editors and reviewers can fairly and efficiently evaluate submissions. Further, we want to avoid burdening our volunteer editorial and reviewer team with being the initial reviewers of generated code.
```

## A complex topic: Benefits and concerns

LLMs are perceived as helping developers:

* Explain complex codebases
* Generate unit tests and docstrings
* In some cases, simplifying language barriers for participants in open source around the world
* Speeding up everyday workflows

Some contributors also perceive these products as making open source more accessible. However, LLM's also present

> unprecedented social and environmental challenges.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some contributors also perceive these products as making open source more accessible. However, LLMs also present
unprecedented social and environmental challenges.
```

### Incorrectness of LLMs and misleading time benefits

Although it is commonly stated that LLMs help improve the productivity of high-level developers, recent scientific explorations of this hypothesis [indicate the contrary](https://metr.org/blog/2025-07-10-early-2025-ai-experienced-os-dev-study/). What's more is that the responses of LLMs for complex coding tasks [tend to be incorrect](https://arxiv.org/html/2407.06153v1) and/or overly verbose/inefficient. It is crucial that, if you use an LLM to help produce code, you should independently evaluate code correctness and efficiency.

### Environmental impacts

Training and running LLMs [requires massive energy consumption](https://www.unep.org/news-and-stories/story/ai-has-environmental-problem-heres-what-world-can-do-about), raising sustainability concerns that sit uncomfortably alongside much of the global scale scientific research that our community supports.

### Impact on learning

> Heavy reliance on LLMs risks producing developers who can prompt, but not debug or maintain, code—undermining long-term project sustainability and growth. This also in the long run will make it [harder for young developers to learn how to code, and troubleshoot independently](https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/without-guardrails-generative-ai-can-harm-education/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Heavy reliance on LLMs risks producing developers who can prompt, but not debug, maintain, or secure production code. This risk undermines long-term project sustainability and growth. In the long run, it will make it [harder for young developers to learn how to code and troubleshoot independently](https://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/without-guardrails-generative-ai-can-harm-education/).
```

* Disclose LLM use in your README and at the top of relevant modules.
* Describe how the Generative AI tools were used in your package's development.
* Be clear about what human review you performed on Generative AI outputs before submitting the package to our open peer review process.

Transparency helps reviewers understand context, trace decisions, and focus their time where it matters most.

### Human oversight

LLM-assisted code must be **reviewed, edited, and tested by humans** before submission.

* Run your tests and confirm the correctness of the code that you submitted.
* Check for security and quality issues.
* Ensure style, readability, and concise docstrings.
* Explain your review process in your software submission to pyOpenSci.

Please **don’t offload vetting of generative AI content to volunteer reviewers**. Arrive with human-reviewed code that you understand, have tested, and can maintain.

### Watch out for licensing issues.

LLMs are trained on large amounts of open source code; most of that code has licenses that require attribution.

> The problem? LLMs sometimes spit out near-exact copies of that training data, but without any attribution or copyright notices.

Author: ```suggestion
LLMs are trained on large amounts of open source code that is bound by various licenses, many of which require attribution. When an LLM generates code, it may reproduce verbatim output or patterns or structures from that training data—but without attribution or copyright notices.
```

Author: Trying to include more than just verbatim ... that fundamentally, the patterns as well are licensed. 

Also wondering here - let's say that i produce some code totally on my own that happens to match a pattern of some code with a license that requires attribution. What happens there? (if my production code is legitimately developed on my own and the pattern just happens to be a great one that others use too, and maybe I've even seen it before, but I'm not intentionally copying).

Reviewer 2: As far as copyright law is concerned, that's exactly the scenario where the substantial similarity standard would be applied. The more substantial the copying and the more closely in time that you would have observed the original, the more likely your work would be found to have substantial similarity and to be infringing. Protecting against that ambiguity is why [clean-room design](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clean-room_design) exists.

Why this matters:

* Using LLM output verbatim could violate the original code's license

> * You might accidentally commit plagiarism or copyright infringement by using that output verbatim in your code

Author: ```suggestion
* License conflicts can occur if your package's license (e.g., MIT) is incompatible with code patterns that the LLM learned on such as code licensed as GPL or Apache-2.0.
```

* Due diligence is nearly impossible since you can't trace what the LLM "learned from" (most LLM's are black boxes)

When licenses clash, it gets messy. Say your package uses an MIT license (common in scientific Python), but an LLM outputs Apache-2.0 or GPL code—those licenses aren't compatible. You can't just add attribution to fix it. Technically, you'd have to delete everything and rewrite it from scratch to comply with the licensing requirements.

> While this is all tricky, here's what you can do, now:

Author: ```suggestion
The reality of all of this is that you can't eliminate this risk of license infringement or plagiarism with current LLM technology. But you can be more thoughtful about how you use the technology. 

**What you can do now:**
```

Our community’s expectation is simple: **be open and disclose any Generative AI use in your package** when you submit it to our open software review process.

* Disclose LLM use in your README and at the top of relevant modules.
* Describe how the Generative AI tools were used in your package's development.
* Be clear about what human review you performed on Generative AI outputs before submitting the package to our open peer review process.

Transparency helps reviewers understand context, trace decisions, and focus their time where it matters most.

### Human oversight

LLM-assisted code must be **reviewed, edited, and tested by humans** before submission.

* Run your tests and confirm the correctness of the code that you submitted.
* Check for security and quality issues.
* Ensure style, readability, and concise docstrings.
* Explain your review process in your software submission to pyOpenSci.

Please **don’t offload vetting of generative AI content to volunteer reviewers**. Arrive with human-reviewed code that you understand, have tested, and can maintain.

> ### Watch out for licensing issues.

Reviewer 3: This section may benefit from another round of editing.

I think it's useful to think of the *types* of content that may or may not be copyrighted. E.g., refactoring your test suite is unlikely to get you in trouble, but implementing a new algorithm is.

But, in the latter case you probably wouldn't use an LLM wholesale, because as you say above you'd need to understand the algorithm to vet it, and then it'd probably be easier to construct it yourself.

You can't control what's in training data, but you can be thoughtful about how you use these tools.

<div class="notice" markdown="1">
Examples of how these licensing issues are impacting and stressing our legal systems:

* [GitHub Copilot litication](https://githubcopilotlitigation.com/case-updates.html)
* [Litigation around text from LLMs](https://arxiv.org/abs/2505.12546)
* [incompatible licenses](https://dwheeler.com/essays/floss-license-slide.html)
</div>

### Review for bias

Inclusion is part of quality. Treat AI-generated text with the same care as code.
Given the known biases that can manifest in Generative AI-derived text:

* Review AI-generated text for stereotypes or exclusionary language.
* Prefer plain, inclusive language.
* Invite feedback and review from diverse contributors.

## Things to consider in your development workflows

If you are a maintainer or a contributor, some of the above can apply to your development and contribution process, too.
Similar to how peer review systems are being taxed, rapid, AI-assisted pull requests and issues can also overwhelm maintainers too. To combat this:

> * Open an issue first before submitting a pull request to ensure it's welcome and needed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* Open an issue first before submitting a pull request to ensure it's welcome and needed.
```
